SPECIAL PILOT ABILITIES
Ability, Cost, Brief Description
Animal Mimicry, 2, Quadruped unit gains mobility bonus and ability to demoralize opponents
Antagonizer, 3, Unit can enrage an opponent for a brief period
Blood Stalker, 2, Unit may focus its attacks better on a preferred target until it is destroyed
Cluster Hitter, 2, Unit can deliver extra damage in an attack using missiles or flak weapons
Combat Intuition, 3, Unit may move and resolve fire before any other unit acts
Cross-Country, 2, Ground vehicle unit may enter some illegal terrain types, but at high Move cost
Demoralizer, 3, Unit can intimidate an opponent for a brief period
Dodge, 2, Unit can attempt to evade physical attacks
Dust-Off, 2, Enables airborne unit types to land or liftoff in non-clear terrain
Eagle’s Eyes, 2, Unit gains (or augments) its ability to spot hidden units and avoid mines
Environmental Specialist, 2, Reduces movement and combat modifiers in a preferred environment
Fist Fire, 2, Unit delivers extra damage in physical attacks
Float Like a Butterfly 1–4, Unit may force an opponent to reroll an attack with this unit as the target
Forward Observer, 1, Unit improves accuracy of indirect fire when used as a spotter
Golden Goose, 3, Improves accuracy for air-to-ground strafing, strike, and bombing attacks
Ground-Hugger, 2, Airborne unit may execute a double-strafe or double-strike air-to-ground attack
Headhunter, 2, Can automatically identify enemy command units
Heavy Lifter, 1, Enables increased carrying capacity with External Cargo rules
Hopper, 1, Unit may avoid being reduced below, 1, inch of Move by MP Hits
Hot Dog, 2, Increases the Heat a unit can sustain before shutdown
Human TRO, 1, Unit can ignore the Concealing Unit Data rules vs. non-hidden opponents
Iron Will, 1, Unit can resist psychological attacks and receives a bonus during Morale checks
Jumping Jack, 2, Improves accuracy of any attack made when the unit uses jumping Move
Lucky 1–4, Unit may reroll a limited number of failed attacks and Control Rolls per scenario
Maneuvering Ace, 2, Reduces Move costs for woods/jungle terrain and aerospace atmospheric control
Marksman, 2, If unit attacks while stationary, may score extra critical after delivering, 1, damage
Melee Master, 2, Unit increases its physical attack damage by half its Size (round up)
Melee Specialist, 1, Unit delivers physical attacks with greater accuracy
Multi-Tasker, 2, Unit can divide its weapon attack between two targets per turn
Natural Grace, 3, Unit gains 3,60-degree field of fire; reduces Move costs in ultra-heavy terrain
Oblique Artilleryman, 1, Improves accuracy and reduces scatter for all artillery weapon attacks
Oblique Attacker, 1, Improves accuracy for indirect fire, and enables indirect attacks without a spotter
Range Master, 2, Unit swaps normal range modifier for Medium, Long, or Extreme range with Short
Ride the Wash, 4, Unit reduces atmospheric combat modifiers; may execute special air-to-air attack
Sandblaster, 2, Unit improves accuracy and damage when only using AC and missile weapons
Shaky Stick, 2, Airborne unit is harder to hit from the ground during air-to-ground attacks
Sharpshooter, 4, If unit attacks while stationary, may score an extra critical after delivering full damage
Slugger, 1, ’Mech unit can improvise its own melee weapons from suitable terrain
Sniper, 3, Unit reduces Medium, Long, and Extreme range modifiers by half.
Speed Demon, 2, Unit can move faster than normal
Stand-Aside, 1, Unit can pass directly through enemy units at extra Move cost
Street Fighter, 2, Unit may pre-empt an attack against it by enemies in base contact
Sure-Footed, 2, Unit receives bonus movement on paved or ice terrain and ignores skidding
Swordsman, 2, Unit can deliver improved damage or critical hits when using MEL special
Tactical Genius, 3, Enables command unit to reroll Initiatives once every, 2, turns
Terrain Master (Drag Racer), 3, Ground vehicle unit gains extra speed on ice or pavement; avoids skidding better
Terrain Master (Forest Ranger), 3, Unit moves more easily through (and gains extra cover from) woods and jungle
Terrain Master (Frogman), 3, Unit moves more easily than others while fully submerged
Terrain Master (Mountaineer), 3, Unit moves more easily through level changes and rough terrain types
Terrain Master (Nightwalker), 3, Unit ignores combat modifiers for darkness
Terrain Master (Sea Monster), 3, Unit moves more easily and ignores attack penalties in water terrain
Terrain Master (Swamp Beast), 3, Unit moves more easily through mud and swamp terrain; ignores bog down in same
Weapon Specialist, 3, Unit can deliver a more accurate attack as long as it uses only half its firepower
Wind Walker, 2, Unit ignores atmospheric combat modifiers and gains a bonus to landing and liftoff
Zweihander, 2, ’Mech unit delivers more damage in physical attacks
Light Horseman, 2, Beast-mounted infantry unit moves faster, even through difficult terrain
Heavy Horse, 2, Beast-mounted infantry unit can inflict extra damage at point-blank range
Foot Cavalry, 1, Foot-based infantry unit moves faster, even through difficult terrain
Urban Guerrilla, 1, Infantry unit is harder to attack in urban terrain, and may “spawn” support

--------------------------------------

ANIMAL MIMICRY
Unit Type: ’Mechs, ProtoMechs (only if the model has four legs)
SPA Cost: 2 points
The pilot with this SPA has combined an exceptional
understanding of animal behavior with his own natural aptitude at
the controls to give the movements of his machine an uncanny—
even frightening—resemblance to that of a wild animal.
This ability, which works only with ’Mech and ProtoMech
units where the model has four legs, reduces the unit’s Move
cost for passing through ultra-heavy woods terrain, ultra-heavy
jungle terrain, or any buildings by 2 inches per inch of movement.
Furthermore, any enemy units that come within 6 inches of this unit
must make a 2D6 roll, and will become Intimidated on a roll result
of 8 or less. Units that are Intimidated in this fashion reduce their
Move by half (round down) and suffer a +1 Target Number modifier
for all attacks made against the animal-mimicking unit until after
the next Movement Phase.

ANTAGONIZER
Unit Type: Any
SPA Cost: 3 points
As combat talents go, the ability to enrage the enemy may seem
ill-conceived at first, but few can overstate how effective it is when
it draws fire from a wounded friend—or exposes the berserking
target’s weaker back armor at the worst possible moment.
Once per turn, a unit with Antagonizer may trigger its ability
at any single point along its path while moving. At that time, every
enemy unit within 6 inches of the unit triggering this SPA must roll
2D6. If the roll is 8 or less, the enemy unit becomes enraged. Enraged
units must move as close as possible to the Antagonizer unit, taking
the most direct, passable, and legal route toward the Antagonizer.
The enraged unit ignores increased movement costs or possible
damage inflicted by its path for determining the most direct path.
The enraged unit can only make attacks against its
Antagonizer, unless the enraged unit has no attack that can target
the Antagonizer. If the unit has multiple attacks, and only some
of those attacks can target the Antagonizer, the enraged unit can
make attacks against other targets only with those attacks that can’t
target the Antagonizer. Attacks from the enraged unit with an area
of effect must include the Antagonizer in the attack’s targeted area
of effect.
If the enraged unit begins any phase more than 24” from
or without line of sight to the Antagonizer, the unit is no longer
enraged. This ability has no effect versus aerospace units.
Iron Will: If an Antagonizer is subject to a similar psychological
attack by another unit with the Animal Mimicry, Antagonizer, or
Demoralizer SPAs, treat the unit as if it has the Iron Will SPA, and
apply a +2 modifier to the roll result to resist being intimidated or
enraged.

BLOOD STALKER
Unit Type: Any
SPA Cost: 2 points
A pilot with this SPA could be said to have a one-tracked mind,
and focuses all of his energies on the destruction of only one enemy
at a time.
The Blood Stalker unit must designate a “chosen enemy” at the
start of each game. All attacks against the chosen enemy receive a
–1 Target Number modifier, but all attacks made against any other
enemies suffer a +2 Target Number modifier until the chosen enemy
is destroyed. If the Blood Stalker starts its Movement with its chosen
enemy out of line of sight or destroyed, the Blood Stalker may
choose a new enemy to stalk.

CLUSTER HITTER
Unit Type: Any
SPA Cost: 2 points
The Cluster Hitter is a pilot who has become a
marksman with some of the least precise weapons
available—such as missiles and flak weaponry. This allows
him to focus his fire in tighter groupings, for more telling
damage potential.
As long as the unit with this SPA does not move
during its Movement Phase, it will add 1 point of
damage to any successful weapon attack that uses the
FLK, LRM, SRM, or TOR special abilities (or an AC special
in conjunction with the Flak and Flechette alternate
munitions; see p. 143). This includes attacks that use only
the ability itself, as well as a “standard” weapon attack.

COMBAT INTUITION
Unit Type: Any
SPA Cost: 3 points
The pilot or crew commander with this SPA has a
knack for accurately predicting an enemy’s actions if he
focuses hard enough on them. Though this intuition is
not quite powerful enough to pass along to an entire force
before the enemy has time to react, the warrior can make
use of his insight to cut off a single opponent once in a
while.
If this unit’s side wins Initiative, the unit whose
pilot has this SPA can move and resolve all of its attacks
during the Movement Phase, applying all damage effects
immediately—before any target units can act. This ability
can only be used once every 3 turns.

CROSS-COUNTRY
Unit Type: Combat Vehicles (but only those that use ground
movement types)
SPA Cost: 2 points
The vehicle driver with this SPA is not merely able to get his
ride into and out of tight spots; he can get it into some places it’s
just not meant to enter!
This ground unit may enter woods, rough, or rubble terrain,
as well as water terrain up to 1 inch deep, even if the vehicle’s
movement type would ordinarily prohibit such movement. When
entering terrain ordinarily prohibited to the unit, consider all Move
costs for these terrains as double the cost to traverse as they would
be for a ’Mech unit.

DEMORALIZER
Unit Type: Any
SPA Cost: 3 points
A warrior with the Demoralizer SPA can make his unit a holy
terror on the battlefield, projecting an intimidating presence that
manifests in the way he maneuvers and taunts his enemies—with
or without the use of communications.
Every enemy unit that comes within 6” of a unit using this
SPA must roll 2D6. If the roll is 8 or less, the enemy unit becomes
intimidated. Intimidated units reduce their Move by half (round
down) and suffer a +1 Target Number modifier for all attacks made
against the Demoralizer. The reduced Move rating does affect its
target movement modifier.
If a demoralized unit begins any phase more than 24” from
or without line of sight to the Demoralizer, the unit is no longer
demoralized. This ability does not function at all versus aerospace
units.
Iron Will: If a Demoralizer is subject to a similar psychological
attack by another unit with the Animal Mimicry, Antagonizer, or
Demoralizer SPAs, treat the unit as if it has the Iron Will SPA, and
apply a +2 modifier to the roll result to resist being intimidated or
enraged.

DODGE
Unit Type: ’Mechs, ProtoMechs
SPA Cost: 2 points
The pilot with this SPA is able to execute evasive actions in
close quarters combat. Though not quite fast enough to evade
weapons fire, it is more than enough to avoid or deflect an incoming
physical blow.
Any opposing unit that attempts to deliver a physical attack
against a unit with this SPA will suffer a +2 Target Number modifier.

DUST-OFF
Unit Type: VTOLs (combat and support), Fighters (aerospace
and conventional), Small Craft, DropShips
SPA Cost: 2 points
With skills likely honed for emergency medical rescues and
other evac operations, this pilot can “read” difficult landing terrain
better than the average aerojock. This makes it possible for him to
find and set his aircraft down in clearings that are barely larger than
its wingspan, where most other pilots wouldn’t dare.
When making landing or liftoff rolls (see p. 141), this unit
reduces the Control Roll target modifier for Inappropriate Landing
Area from +2 to +1.

EAGLE’S EYES
Unit Type: Any
SPA Cost: 2 points
For some warriors, even thirty-first century sensors are
superfluous. The warrior with this SPA is so alert and sensor-savvy
that he can practically identify threats before his tactical computers
can identify them, a vital edge in spotting hidden surprises before
it’s too late.
This unit adds 2 inches of detection range to any probe special
abilities it already possesses (including BH, PRB, and LPRB), and
confers the RCN special to the unit even if it does not possess such
abilities normally. In addition, any hidden units within 2 inches
of this unit are automatically detected, even if they possess ECM
specials (including AECM, ECM, and LECM). Finally, this unit adds
+2 to the target number to avoid minefield “attacks” of any density.

ENVIRONMENTAL SPECIALIST
[coNDitioN]
Unit Type: Any
SPA Cost: 2 points
The pilot with the Environmental Specialist SPA has not only
learned how to survive in a harsh environment, but can actually
thrive in it. This ability specifically focuses on atmospheric and
weather aspects of a given environment (as opposed to terrain
mastery), and the nature of this specialization must be identified
when assigned.
The conditions that apply to this SPA must be specified for this
unit before the scenario begins, and may include any one condition
described under Environmental Conditions (see p. 61). If the given
environmental condition applies to the scenario, this reduces any
additional Move costs created by that condition by 2 inches (to a
minimum of +0 inches), and any Target Number modifiers applied
by the condition are also reduced by –1 (to a minimum of +0).

FIST FIRE
Unit Type: ’Mechs, ProtoMechs
SPA Cost: 2 points
While BattleMechs and ProtoMechs often mimic the human
form, it is only the superlative warriors who can make the most of
their dexterity in battle. The warrior who has developed the Fist Fire
SPA demonstrates this by using his machines onboard weapons to
augment his physical attacks.
This pilot with this ability adds half of his unit’s Short range
damage value (round up) to any damage delivered by a successful
standard or melee weapon (MEL special) physical attack. This SPA
may not be combined with Street Fighter, nor can it be used to
increase damage for charging or Death from Above attacks.

FLOAT LIKE A BUTTERFLY
Unit Type: Any
SPA Cost: 1 to 4 points
For every point spent on purchasing this special pilot ability,
this unit may force an opponent to reroll an attack with this unit as
the target. This unit may force a reroll of the attack roll, or the critical
hit effects roll. The second roll result stands, even if it fails or is worse
than the first.
This special pilot ability may not be used to change the outcome
of other roll types, such as its own attack rolls, hull breach checks,
Initiative, or Morale rolls.

FORWARD OBSERVER
Unit Type: Any
SPA Cost: 1 point
The Forward Observer is a warrior whose finely honed direction
sense, keen eyesight, and intelligence have combined into a talent
for hyper-accurate artillery direction.
A Forward Observer may serve as a spotter for multiple artillery
attacks against one target. If the Forward Observer makes its own
attack, any indirect attacks it spots for (IF or indirect Artillery) do not
take the Target Number modifier for the spotter attacking.

GOLDEN GOOSE
Unit Type: VTOLs (combat and support), Fighters (aerospace
and conventional), Small Craft
SPA Cost: 3 points
The pilot with this ability is a true ace when it comes to high
speed air-to-ground attacks, often delivering accurate fire with a
minimal amount of collateral damage.
When resolving air-to-ground combat rules (see p. 181) this SPA
applies a –1 Target Number modifier for air-to-ground strafing or
striking attacks, and a –2 modifier for bombing attacks. Furthermore,
if a bombing attack misses, the scatter distance is reduced by 2
inches (to a minimum of 0 inches).

GROUND-HUGGER
Unit Type: VTOLs (combat and support), Fighters
(aerospace and conventional), Small Craft
SPA Cost: 2 points
Another special skill for ace aviators with a burning
hatred for those damned “ground-pounders”, the
Ground Hugger SPA reflects a pilot whose fast reflexes
and sense of timing enable him to deliver more damage
in a single pass than most others.
When resolving air-to-ground combat rules
(see p. 181) the pilot with this SPA can execute either
“double strafe”, or a “double strike” attack in a single
ground-attack pass. The double strafe attack allows
the unit to break its normal 10-inch strafing run into
two strafing areas, each at least 2 inches long (and 2
inches wide), with a total combined strafe line of 10
inches. The double strike attack, meanwhile, allows the
unit to deliver two strike attacks in a single pass over
the battlefield. All attacks made using this SPA must be
along the airborne unit’s flight path.

HEADHUNTER
Unit Type: Any
SPA Cost: 2 points
Can automatically identify enemy command
units. This includes overall (e.g., company) and subunit
(lance) commanders in a given battle. Gains +1 Initiative
bonus (cumulative, max of +3) for each opposing
command unit killed/disabled (not necessarily by her
own attacks). If the opposing force does not have any
designated command units, the highest PV cost unit
(after Skill modification) in a Formation, is considered
the commander of that Formation for this SPA.

HEAVY LIFTER
Unit Type: ’Mechs
SPA Cost: 1 point
The Heavy Lifter is a MechWarrior or IndustrialMech pilot who
has mastered the finer points of balance and control when using
his machine to lift and carry external cargo. With this SPA, the unit
adds 1 level to the maximum Size of any cargo (or units) his ’Mech
can lift, drag, or throw using the External Cargo Carriers rules (see
p. 163). If this would exceed a Size of 5, the unit can lift cargo or
units that also have the LG special. If the maximum Size allowance
already includes the LG special, the unit can lift Very Large cargo
or units (VLG).
Furthermore, if the Size of the cargo or unit being carried
by the Heavy Lifter is more than 3 levels smaller than that of his
own ’Mech, the Heavy Lifter’s unit only reduces its movement by 2
inches, rather than by half.

HOPPER
Unit Type: BM, IM
SPA Cost: 1 point
The MechWarrior with this special pilot ability has an extremely
fine sense of balance—so fine, in fact, that he can even remain
mobile after one of his ’Mech’s legs has been blown off. A unit
controlled by a pilot with this SPA can ignore the effects of the first
MP Hit it receives (it still occurs, for the purposes of any event which
tracks critical hits; only the effects are ignored).
Note: This ability does not grant movement if the unit has been
immobilized for other reasons—such as when shutdown or stuck
in bog down terrain.

HOT DOG
Unit Type: BM, IM, AF
SPA Cost: 2 points
This MechWarrior or fighter pilot knows how to ride the heat
envelope. The unit acts as if it was one level lower on the Heat scale,
and can sustain 4 points of Heat before automatically shutting
down rather than the usual 3. At 4 points of Heat, the unit loses 6” of
ground movement, subtracts 2 from its Target Movement Modifier
(minimum TMM of 0), and suffers a +3 Target Number modifier
instead of shutting down.

HUMAN TRO
Unit Type: Any
SPA Cost: 1 point
Everyone has a hobby; this guy’s happens to be memorizing
the specs for thousands of ’Mechs—and he won’t let you forget it!
If the Concealing Unit Data rules are in play (see p. 157), this unit
will automatically identify any non-hidden unit within 12 inches,
revealing the subject’s data card as if the Human TRO’s unit has the
LPRB special. This ability applies even if the Human TRO’s unit does
not have an active probe of any kind, but it does not confer the
ability to reveal hidden units. In addition, the Human TRO may look
for a weak spot in a target unit once per game. The use of this ability
must be declared before rolling to hit. If the attack hits, the attacker
may roll once on the Determining Critical Hits Table, in addition to
any such rolls required for any other reason.

IRON WILL
Unit Type: Any
SPA Cost: 1 point
This warrior knows no fear. A unit with this ability is resistant to
“psychological attacks” by opposing units, and can even overcome
his natural impulse to flee when all hope seems lost. When forced
to make a roll against the intimidating or enraging effects of an
opponent using the Animal Mimicry, Antagonizer, or Demoralizer
SPAs, a unit whose pilot or crew has the Iron Will SPA, applies a +2
modifier to the roll result to resist these effects.
Furthermore, if the Morale rules are in play (see p. 169), a
unit controlled by a pilot or crew with this ability adds a –2 target
modifier to avoid being routed or when recovering its nerve.

JUMPING JACK
Unit Type: BM, IM, PM
SPA Cost: 2 points
While jumping ’Mechs generally demonstrate all the grace
once can expect from brute technological force overpowering
physics, some pilots have turned these maneuvers into an art form.
A pilot with the Jumping Jack SPA is so comfortable with the use of
jumping movement that his unit receives an additional –1 Target
Number modifier for any weapon attack it attempts during a turn
where it has used jumping movement.

LUCKY
Unit Type: Any
SPA Cost: (1 to 4) points
It’s not really skill that’s placing this pilot’s shots, but nobody
cares as long as he gets the job done. For every point spent on
purchasing this special pilot ability, this unit may reroll 1 failed
attack roll or 1 failed Control Roll per scenario. The second roll result
stands, even if it fails or is worse than the first.
This special pilot ability may not be used to change the
outcome of other roll types, such as critical hit checks, hull breach
checks, Initiative, or Morale rolls.

MANEUVERING ACE
Unit Type: Any
SPA Cost: 2 points
This pilot knows how to get his ride into and out of tight
spots in a hurry. This unit reduces the cost for moving through all
woods and jungle terrain types by 1 inch per inch of movement. For
aerospace units, a pilot with this SPA reduces the unit’s Control Roll
target modifier for atmospheric combat from +2 to +1.

MARKSMAN
Unit Type: Any
SPA Cost: 2 points
He may not be a sharpshooter yet, but the gunner with this
SPA is skilled at placing his shots for maximum effect. As long as
this unit stands still during its Movement Phase, any successful
weapon attack it executes against a target within its weapon’s range
will deliver only half damage (rounded down, to a minimum of 1
point)—but if the attack scores a MoS of 3 or more, the Marksman
also makes an additional Critical Hit check against its target. This
critical check is made even if the target still has armor.

MELEE MASTER
Unit Type: BM, IM, PM
SPA Cost: 2 points
This MechWarrior is a martial artist who’s managed to teach
his ’Mech a few of his own tricks. A pilot with this SPA adds
additional damage equal to half his unit’s Size value (rounded up),
upon delivering a successful physical attack of any kind, including
standard, melee, charging, and Death from Above attacks.

MELEE SPECIALIST
Unit Type: BM, IM, PM
SPA Cost: 1 point
The Melee Specialist SPA reflects a warrior who mastered the
use of physical attacks using his machine’s arms, legs, hands, and
feet—a talent that translates to greater accuracy in a melee. A pilot
with this ability applies an additional –1 Target Number modifier
when making any physical attacks.

MULTI-TASKER
Unit Type: Any
SPA Cost: 2 points
This battle-focused warrior can engage multiple targets far
more accurately than most of his comrades. At the player’s option,
any unit whose gunner possesses this SPA may select two targets
to attack in the same turn, and resolves fire against each one
separately in the same combat phase. You may await the results of
the first attack before declaring the target of the second, and the
same unit may be targeted twice. Each attack is resolved using the
modifiers appropriate to the target’s movement, range, and other
conditions; the divided attack will not impose any further Target
Number modifiers. Each successful attack divided in this way will
deliver half of the damage (rounded down, to a minimum of 1)
that the unit would ordinarily inflict against a single target at the
appropriate range bracket.
For example, a Multi-Tasker unit with a damage value of 4/3/2
may decide to target two separate enemies—one at Short range,
and the other at Medium. If both attacks succeed, the target at Short
range will receive 2 points of damage (4 ÷ 2 = 2), while the Medium-
range target will receive only 1 point of damage (3 ÷ 2 = 1.5, round
down to 1).

NATURAL GRACE
Unit Type: BM, IM, PM
SPA Cost: 3 points
They just don’t teach the piloting skills this warrior can
demonstrate the normal academies! This unit may make attacks as
if it has a 360-degree firing arc (but still suffers 1 additional damage
point if attacked through the rear facing). It also reduces its Move
cost for passing through ultra-heavy woods terrain, ultra-heavy
jungle terrain, or any buildings by 1 inch per inch of movement.

OBLIQUE ARTILLERYMAN
Unit Type: Any
SPA Cost: 1 point
The Oblique Artilleryman SPA represents a gunner whose
accuracy with indirect artillery weapons is downright uncanny.
A unit that possesses this special pilot ability receives a –1 Target
Number modifier for indirect and off-board attacks using the ART
special ability.
If the Oblique Artilleryman is delivering counter-battery fire
against an off-board artillery position—see Artillery Counter-Battery
Fire, p. 153—this ability ensures that the artillery weapon will deliver
its full damage to its off-board target even if the attack misses by a
MoF of 1. If the MoF for a counter-battery attack against an off-board
position is 2 or 3, the weapon will deliver half its normal damage to the
off-board target instead. If Oblique Artilleryman misses by 4 points or
more, his shells miss the off-board target entirely.

OBLIQUE ATTACKER
Unit Type: Any
SPA Cost: 1 point
Darting behind cover can’t save an enemy from this warrior’s
missile fire. This unit receives a –1 Target Number modifier for indirect
attacks using the IF special ability, and may even make indirect fire
attacks without a friendly spotter. If attempting to use indirect fire
without a friendly spotter, however, the unit trades its –1 Target
Number modifier for a +2 modifier (which replaces any and all
spotter-related modifiers).

RANGE MASTER
Unit Type: Any
SPA Cost: 2 points
This warrior’s ability to strike at their enemies has a certain
comfort zone. Choose one range bracket other than the Short or
Horizon brackets. The gunner for this unit specializes in attacks at
that bracket: apply a –2 Target Number modifier for attacks in the
specialized bracket, but a +2 modifier for any attack made in the
Short range bracket.
SPA S M L E
Standard +0 +2 +4 +6
Sniper +0 +1 +2 +3
Medium Range Master +2 +0 +4 +6
Long Range Master +2 +2 +2 +6
Long Range Master w/ Sniper +2 +1 +0 +3
Medium Range Master
w/ Sniper +2 +0 +2 +3
Extreme Range Master
w/ Sniper +2 +1 +2 +1

RIDE THE WASH
Unit Type: Any airborne unit
SPA Cost: 4 points
This pilot has logged hundreds of flight hours with his aircraft,
and has learned to use its own unique wake turbulence (“wash”)
to enhance its maneuverability and even use it as an improvised
attack against opposing aerospace that flies too close. A pilot
with this ability reduces the unit’s Control Roll target modifiers for
atmospheric combat from +2 to +0.
In addition to this, if the unit is an aerospace or conventional
fighter (AF or CF) that is tailing another aerospace unit in air-to-air
combat, and the engagement is taking place at Short range, this
pilot can forego a weapon attack and instead force his target to
make a second Control Roll with a +3 target number modifier. If
the opposing unit fails this roll, it falls two altitudes, and will crash
if it falls from Low or Medium altitude.

SANDBLASTER
Unit Type: Any
SPA Cost: 2 points
Much like the Cluster Hitter, the gunner with the Sandblaster
SPA has honed his accuracy with weapons that normally disperse
damage, rather than focus it, but where the Cluster Hitter goes for
concentrated fire, the Sandblaster is a specialist who works best
with just his cluster weapons. When this unit delivers a weapon
attack using only one of the following specials—AC, FLK, IATM, LRM,
SRM, or TOR—it receives a –1 Target Number modifier, and delivers
an additional 1 point of damage (increased to 2 points if the attack
is made at Short range).

SHAKY STICK
Unit Type: Any airborne unit
SPA Cost: 2 points
This fighter jock has really learned to respect fire when it comes
from the ground. When exposed to ground-to-air fire (see p. 186),
this SPA adds a +1 Target Number modifier to all attacks against
the unit from ground-based attackers. This modifier will not apply
to other airborne units that attack the pilot’s craft.

SHARPSHOOTER
Unit Type: Any
SPA Cost: 4 points
The Sharpshooter is an improved version of the Marksman SPA,
representing a more accomplished gunner who can strike at his
enemy’s weakest points with deadly accuracy while still delivering
a powerful barrage. Similar to the Marksman SPA, if this warrior’s
unit stands still during its Movement Phase, and delivers attack
that succeeds by a margin of 3 or more, the attack receives an
additional Critical Hit check, even if the target still has armor. Unlike
the Marksman, however, this attack delivers the unit’s full damage
value at the target’s range (rather than only 1 point).

SLUGGER
Unit Type: BM, IM
SPA Cost: 1 point
Some ’Mechs have built in swords and hatchets to fight with,
but this MechWarrior knows how to improvise his own. This unit
can make use of an improvised melee weapon by simply spending
2 extra inches of movement in a woods, jungle, rubble, or building
terrain to find an appropriate weapon. This action requires no roll
and creates no special modifiers, but must be declared during the
unit’s Movement Phase.
After obtaining a suitable weapon, the unit may execute
physical attacks as if it has the MEL special ability, even if it ordinarily
does not. This SPA has no effect if the unit already possesses the
MEL special.

SNIPER
Unit Type: Any
SPA Cost: 3 points
The sniper prefers to fight from a distance. This gunner’s SPA
reduces their unit’s Range Modifiers at Medium, Long, and Extreme
range to +1 (Medium), +2 (Long), and +3 (Extreme), but does not
affect the Short or Horizon range modifiers. Sniper also has no effect
on indirect fire (IF) or artillery (ART) attacks.

SPEED DEMON
Unit Type: Any
SPA Cost: 2 points
A pilot with the Speed Demon SPA can really pour it on! Ground
units of all motive types (including VTOLs and WiGE vehicles) receive
an additional 2 inches of Move per turn when driven by a pilot with
this ability, and increase their Sprinting movement (see p. 38) by 4
inches per turn. This speed boost will not change the unit’s Target
Movement Modifier, however.
Aerospace units piloted by a pilot with this ability receive an
effective Thrust value 1 point higher than is listed on their stat cards.

STAND-ASIDE
Unit Type: Any
SPA Cost: 1 point
This unit can move through hostile units during its Movement
Phase, at an additional cost of 1 inch of Move. This action causes
no damage to either unit; it simply negates the normal “stacking
restriction” that prevents units from moving directly through
enemy-occupied positions on the map.
Zone of Control: A unit piloted by a warrior with this SPA is
also immune to the maneuver-limiting effects of any opposing unit
using the Zone of Control special command ability against it (see
p. 109).

STREET FIGHTER
Unit Type: BM, IM, PM
SPA Cost: 2 points
This unit is able to deliver physical attacks with such blinding
speed that it can essentially pre-empt those of an opposing unit
once it gets close enough. If an opponent in base contact with the
Street Fighter’s unit attempts to make an attack before the Street
Fighter has resolved his own, the Street Fighter may attempt a
special “preemptive strike” of his own against that opponent.
This preemptive strike receives a +1 Target Number modifier,
and effectively counts as the Street Fighter unit’s weapon and
physical attack for the turn. If successful, the preemptive strike
delivers damage equal to the Street Fighter unit’s Short range
attack value, plus its normal physical attack damage (including
any extra damage provided by a MEL or TSM special ability)—in a
single volley. All damage effects from a Street Fighter’s preemptive
strike must be determined before the opponent’s attack against
the Street Fighter are resolved. Thus, it is possible in this way for a
Street Fighter to cripple or destroy his opponent before it can even
land its blow…regardless of Initiative order.
Dueling Street Fighters: If both units in base contact are
Street Fighters, the ability for each to pre-empt the other’s attacks
will cancel out, and all attacks between them must be resolved
normally.

SURE-FOOTED
Unit Type: BM, IM, PM
SPA Cost: 2 points
This unit receives an additional 2 inches to its normal movement
allowance any turn it remains entirely on paved or ice terrain (in
addition to the normal pavement movement bonus). If Sprinting
movement is used (see p. 38), the Sure-Footed unit adds 4 inches
(plus any pavement bonus) as long as his vehicle remains on the
paved or ice terrain. Furthermore, if the Skidding rules are in play
(see p. 74), the Sure-Footed SPA applies a –2 target number modifier
to the unit’s Control Roll.

SWORDSMAN
Unit Type: BM, IM, PM
SPA Cost: 2 points
A MechWarrior or ProtoMech pilot with the Swordsman SPA
has taken his own experience with melee weapons and translated
it to a finesse rarely seen in a multi-ton war machine, granting its
own physical combat weapons enough skill and accuracy to deliver
far more telling blows. On a successful physical attack made while
using the unit’s MEL special, this pilot may choose one of two
options: deliver 1 extra point of damage to the opponent, or roll
one additional Critical Hit against the target—even if it still has armor
remaining. Note that if the unit lacks the MEL special, the Swordsman
SPA will have no effect.

TACTICAL GENIUS
Unit Type: Any
SPA Cost: 3 points
An officer with this special pilot ability has a superior grasp
of the battlefield situation, and can tap into this combat sense to
maintain control even under the most chaotic firefights. If this unit is
the command unit for its side, its controlling player may roll a second
time for Initiative if the first roll was beaten by his opponent. This
Initiative reroll result stands, even if it is worse. An Initiative reroll
may only be attempted once every 2 turns.
In addition, if the Battlefield Intelligence rules are in play (see p.
154), this unit is treated as if it has the MHQ4 special ability.

TERRAIN MASTER [DRAG RACER]
Unit Type: CV (only if the unit has the tracked or wheeled
motive types)
SPA Cost: 3 points
A vehicle driver with this SPA isn’t just a speed demon; he’s
practically a professional racer. This unit receives an additional
2 inches to its normal movement allowance any turn it remains
entirely on paved or ice terrain (in addition to the normal pavement
movement bonus). If Sprinting movement is used (see p. 38), the
Drag Racer adds 4 inches (plus any pavement bonus) as long as
his vehicle remains on the paved or ice terrain. Furthermore, if the
Skidding rules are in play (see p. 74), the Terrain Master [Drag Racer]
SPA applies a –2 target number modifier to the unit’s Control Roll.

TERRAIN MASTER [FOREST RANGER]
Unit Type: Any non-airborne unit
SPA Cost: 3 points
This warrior with this ability is truly at home in woodlands. A unit
piloted by a warrior with this SPA reduces its additional Move costs
when travelling through woods or jungle terrain (including heavy
and ultra-heavy woods and jungle) by 1 inch per inch of movement
(to a minimum added cost of +0 inches). In addition to this, attacks
against this warrior’s unit suffer an additional +1 Terrain Modifier if
it ends its movement inside wooded or jungle terrain.

TERRAIN MASTER [FROGMAN]
Unit Type: BM, IM, PM
SPA Cost: 3 points
This MechWarrior or ProtoMech pilot is uncommonly good at
maneuvering his machine underwater, even without the benefits
of UMU mobility. This SPA reduces the unit’s movement costs for
underwater movement by 1 inch per inch of travel, to a minimum
added Move cost of +0 inches. This benefit only applies when the
unit is fully submerged.

TERRAIN MASTER [MOUNTAINEER]
Unit Type: Any non-airborne unit
SPA Cost: 3 points
The Mountaineer is a warrior or vehicle pilot who has an affinity
for steep slopes and rocks. This SPA reduces the additional Move
costs for changing levels, using Climbing movement (see p. 72), or
for passing through rough and rubble terrain types (including ultra-
rough and ultra-rubble) by 1 inch per inch of travel, to a minimum
added Move cost of +0 inches.

TERRAIN MASTER [NIGHTWALKER]
Unit Type: Any non-airborne unit
SPA Cost: 3 points
The warrior with this special piloting ability likes things nice and
dark. This unit ignores all modifiers for darkness without having to
activate any searchlight (SRCH) special ability it may have.

TERRAIN MASTER [SEA MONSTER]
Unit Type: Any non-airborne unit
SPA cost: 3 points
This unit reduces the additional Move costs for passing
through water terrain by 1 inch per inch of travel, to a minimum
added cost of +0 inches. In addition to this, attacks against this
pilot’s unit will suffer an additional +1 Terrain Modifier as long
as the unit is occupying water terrain of depth 1”–2”. The Sea
Monster ignores the +1 underwater terrain modifier when it is
attacking.

TERRAIN MASTER [SWAMP BEAST]
Unit Type: Any non-airborne unit
SPA Cost: 3 points
Terrain masters have honed their piloting skills under
particularly treacherous conditions; the “swamp beast” knows
how to handle mud, marsh—even quicksand, if it comes up.
This unit reduces the additional Move costs for passing through
swamp terrain by 1 inch per inch of travel, to a minimum added
cost of +0 inches. In addition to this, the Swamp Beast ignores the
bogging down rules (see p. 60) when traveling through mud or
swamp terrain. Finally, attacks against this pilot’s unit will suffer an
additional +1 Terrain Modifier as long as the unit is occupying mud
or swamp terrain.

WEAPON SPECIALIST
Unit Type: Any
SPA Cost: 3 points
The weapon specialist is a superlative expert with certain types
of weapons, and can deliver much more accurate fire when he sticks
to those guns alone. If the unit makes a standard weapons attack
and misses by 1, the attack deals half damage (round down, to a
minimum of 1 point).

WIND WALKER
Unit Type: Any airborne unit
SPA Cost: 2 points
The Wind Walker is an accomplished pilot who has a knack for
using thermals and wind currents for a smoother flight and pinpoint
landings. A unit whose pilot has this SPA ignores the +2 Control
Roll target modifier for operating in atmospheric conditions, and
receives an additional –1 Control Roll target modifier for all landings
and liftoffs.

ZWEIHANDER
Unit Type: BM, IM
SPA Cost: 2 points
This MechWarrior really puts his machine’s back into physical
combat. A pilot with this SPA adds +1 damage to the damage
delivered by any successful standard- or melee-type physical
attacks his ’Mech executes (but does not apply to damage from
charging or Death from Above attacks). This damage modifier is
in addition to any others provided by special unit abilities such
as MEL or TSM.
